### By: Michelle Kae Celine Jo-anne Bantugon

Business Challenge built by [Professor Chase Kusterer](https://github.com/chase-kusterer)<br>
Hult International Business School<br>

### Introduction
The World Health Organization (WHO) defines low birth weight (LBW) as a birth weight of less than 2500 g. LBW is a major global public health concern. 19.8 million babies, or 14.7 percent of all births worldwide in 2020, were afflicted by LBW. This statistic is essential for evaluating the health of newborns and understanding the difficulties pregnant women experience (Alam, M. et.al, 2024). Prenatal care is considered by many to be an essential part of a pregnant mother’s healthcare. The 2002 North Dakota PRAMS survey found that mothers who were younger, less educated, single, American Indian, or Medicaid people were more likely to report having difficulty accessing prenatal care as early as they would have liked. Therefore, by direct clinical screening and healthcare intervention, it is essential to precisely identify which pregnant patients may be most at-risk of delivering a baby with LBW during the preconception or early stages of pregnancy in order to save newborn lives and save potentially avoidable medical expenses.

Predicting low birth weight (LBW) will serve as a valuable tool for prevention and as an indicator of potential health risks for newborns. This analysis utilized different machine learning models and techniques to analyzed feature importance (risk factors) to make predictions regarding LBW.

### Conclusion & Actionable Insights
The results of the analysis reveal that low birthweight may be caused by a number of factors. The model found that the month prenatal care began, mother’s age, mother’s race (white), and prenatal visits were the most significant factors. It indicates that the highest risk factor for low birth weight is the combined features of mother’s age and the starting month of their prenatal care. This is followed by the inadequate prenatal visits (fewer than 8). The model also showed that the combined features of women older than 34 of white race were associated with low birth weight. Other factors such as the combined features of starting month of prenatal care and different races as well as educational level were among the other features that can help predict low birthweight.

These findings were all consistent to the study in North Dakota last 2002 in which mothers had an average of 11 prenatal care visits and only 20 percent of mothers also did not receive prenatal care in their first trimester. Moreover research last 2016 about the Timing and Adequacy of Prenatal Care in the United States in which it was found out that Prenatal Care (PNC) utilization in the United States, based on the trimester of pregnancy in which PNC began and the Adequacy of Prenatal Care Utilization (APNCU) Index, by maternal age, race and Hispanic origin, education, state of residence, birth order, and source of payment for the delivery. Similarly, state data center records showed that race, mother’s age, and educational attainment all contributed to the quantity of mothers in North Dakota who did not start prenatal care in the first trimester.

Pregnant women should therefore start having prenatal checks in the first trimester (the first four months of pregnancy) and made at least eight to ten visits of the recommended checkup prior to delivery. Likewise, it is also crucial to have a regular, promptly, and adequate appointments in order to improve delivery outcomes and prevent low birth weight. Advanced maternal age was another crucial component, specifically for white mothers, since it is considered that an older mother during birth poses a considerable risk for the health of the delivery. Healthcare systems can strengthen measures to support frequent and early prenatal visits in order to better safeguard against potential risks related to low birth weight. Moreover, for expecting mothers who might not be aware of these risk factors, it might direct the development of targeted LBW early prevention, clinical intervention, and statewide changes to maternity and infant health policies. Implementing these actionable strategies and having a system for services and access can effectively prevent and address low birth weight issues, thereby improving both maternal and infant health outcomes.

